                                         Proceedings of xxx xxx xxx vol xxx:1–23, 2021




                                                 BarrierNet: A Safety-Guaranteed Layer for Neural Networks

                                         Wei Xiao                                                                                 WEIXY @ MIT. EDU

                                         Ramin Hasani                                                                          RHASANI @ MIT. EDU

                                         Xiao Li                                                                                  XIAOLI @ MIT. EDU

                                         Daniela Rus*                                                                                 RUS @ MIT. EDU




arXiv:2111.11277v1 [cs.LG] 22 Nov 2021
                                                                                         Abstract
                                              This paper introduces differentiable higher-order control barrier functions (CBF) that are end-to-
                                              end trainable together with learning systems. CBFs are usually overly conservative, while guar-
                                              anteeing safety. Here, we address their conservativeness by softening their definitions using en-
                                              vironmental dependencies without loosing safety guarantees, and embed them into differentiable
                                              quadratic programs. These novel safety layers, termed a BarrierNet, can be used in conjunction with
                                              any neural network-based controller, and can be trained by gradient descent. BarrierNet allows the
                                              safety constraints of a neural controller be adaptable to changing environments. We evaluate them
                                              on a series of control problems such as traffic merging and robot navigations in 2D and 3D space,
                                              and demonstrate their effectiveness compared to state-of-the-art approaches.
                                              Keywords: Neural Network, Safety Guarantees, Control Barrier Function


                                         1. Introduction
                                         The deployment of learning systems in decision-critical applications such as autonomous ground
                                         and aerial vehicle control is strictly conditional to their safety properties. This is because one sim-
                                         ple mistake made by a learned controller, can lead to catastrophic outcomes. Notwithstanding,
                                         ensuring the safety (e.g., providing guarantees that a self-driving car will never collide with ob-
                                         stacles) of modern learning-based autonomous controllers is challenging. This is because these
                                         models perform representation learning end-to-end in unstructured environments, and are expected
                                         to generalize well to unseen situations.
                                             In this work, we take insights from designing data-driven safety controllers (Ames et al., 2014,
                                         2017) to equip end-to-end learning systems with safety guarantees. To this end, we propose a fun-
                                         damental algorithm to synthesize safe neural controllers end-to-end, by defining novel instances of
                                         control barrier functions (CBFs), that are differentiable. CBFs are popular methods for guarantee-
                                         ing safety when the system dynamics are known. A large body of work studied variants of CBFs
                                         (Nguyen and Sreenath, 2016; Wang et al., 2018; Taylor et al., 2020a; Choi et al., 2020; Taylor et al.,
                                         2020b), and their characteristics under increasing uncertainty (Xu et al., 2015; Gurriet et al., 2018;
                                         Taylor and Ames, 2020). The common observation is that as the uncertainty of models increase
                                         CBFs make the system’s behavior excessively conservative (Csomay-Shanklin et al., 2021).
                                             In the present study, we address this over-conservativeness of CBFs by replacing the set of
                                         hard constraints in high order CBFs (HOCBFs) (Xiao and Belta, 2021) for arbitrary-relative-degree
                                         systems, with a set of differentiable soft constraints without loss of safety guarantees. This way, we
                                         obtain a versatile safety guaranteed barrier layer, termed a BarrierNet, that can be combined with
                                           * All authors are with CSAIL MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.




                                         © 2021 W. Xiao, R. Hasani, X. Li & D. Rus.
                                        X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




                                   Neural Network
                                                           diﬀeren'able control
                Observation    𝑧                             barrier func'ons
                                               …                                       Controls
                 variables                                      𝜓! 𝑥, 𝑧 ≔
                                                       𝜓̇ !"# + 𝒑𝒊 𝒛 𝛼! (𝜓!"# 𝑥, 𝑧 )

                                                           BarrierNet layer


                                                       𝑥               Collision free
                                                                       guarantees




                                       Environment

Figure 1: A safety guaranteed BarrierNet controller for autonomous driving. Collision avoidance
          is guaranteed. x is the vehicle state, and z is the observation variable. ψi (x, z), i ∈
          {1, . . . , m} are a sequence of CBFs with their class K funtions αi in a HOCBF with
          relative degree m. pi (z), i ∈ {1, . . . , m} are trainable parameters or from the previous
          layer. A standard HOCBF does not have the trainable terms pi (z), and thus, each ψi is
          independent of the observation variable z.



any deep learning system (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017;
Lechner and Hasani, 2020; Hasani et al., 2021a), and can be trained end-to-end via reverse-mode
automatic differentiation (Rumelhart et al., 1986).
     BarrierNet allows the safety constraints of a neural controller to be adaptable to changing en-
vironments. A typical application of BarrierNet is autonomous driving that is shown in Fig. 1. In
this example, a neural network outputs acceleration and steering commands to navigate the vehi-
cle along the center lane while avoiding obstacles. The system and environmental observations are
inputs to the upstream network whose outputs serve as arguments to the BarrierNet layer. Finally,
BarrierNet outputs the controls that guarantee collision avoidance. In contrast to existing work, our
proposed architecture is end-to-end trainable including the BarrierNet for neural networks.
Contributions: (i) We propose a novel trainable and interpretable layer, built by leveraging the def-
inition of higher order control barrier functions,that provides safety guarantees for general control
problems with neural network controllers. (ii) We resolve the over-conservativeness of CBFs by in-
troducing differentiable soft constraints in their definition (c.f., Fig. 1). This way we can train them
end-to-end with a given learning system. (iii) We design BarrierNet such that the CBF parameters
are adaptive to changes in environmental conditions. CBF parameters can be learned from data. We
evaluate BarrierNet on a set of control problems including traffic merging and robot navigation with
obstacles in 2D and 3D.
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 2 and 3, we provide the related work and the necessary
background to construct our theory, respectively. We formulate our problem in Sec. 4 and introduce
BarrierNets in Sec. 5. Sec. 6 includes our experimental evaluation and we conclude the paper in
Sec. 7.

                                                   2
                                            BARRIER N ET




2. Related Work

Control Barrier Function and Learning. A large body of work studied CBF-based safety guaran-
tees (Nguyen and Sreenath, 2016; Wang et al., 2018; Taylor et al., 2020a; Choi et al., 2020; Taylor
et al., 2020b), and their characteristics under increasing model uncertainty (Xu et al., 2015; Gur-
riet et al., 2018; Taylor and Ames, 2020). Many existing works (Ames et al., 2017; Nguyen and
Sreenath, 2016; Yang et al., 2019) combine CBFs for systems with quadratic costs to form opti-
mization problems. Time is discretized and an optimization problem with constraints given by the
CBFs (inequalities of the form (4 )) which are solved at each time step. The inter-sampling effect
is considered in (Yang et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2021a). Replacing CBFs by HOCBFs allows us
to handle constraints with arbitrary relative degree (Xiao and Belta, 2021). The common observa-
tion is that as the uncertainty of models increases, CBFs make the system’s behavior excessively
conservative (Csomay-Shanklin et al., 2021).
    The recently proposed adaptive CBFs (AdaCBFs) (Xiao et al., 2021b) addressed the conser-
vativeness of the HOCBF method by multiplying the class K functions of an HOCBF with some
penalty functions. These penalties functions, themselves, are HOCBFs such that they are guaranteed
to be non-negative. This is due to the fact that the main conservativeness of the HOCBF method
comes from the class K functions. By multiplying (relaxing) the class K functions with some
penalty functions, it has been shown that the satisfaction of the AdaCBF constraint is a necessary
and sufficient condition for the satisfaction of the original safety constraint b(x) ≥ 0 (Xiao et al.,
2021b). This is conditioned on designing proper auxiliary dynamics for all the penalty functions,
based on specific problems. However, how to design such auxiliary dynamics is still a remaining
challenge, which we study here.
    At the intersection of CBFs and learning, supervised learning techniques have been proposed to
learn safe set definitions from demonstrations (Robey et al., 2020), and sensor data (Srinivasan et al.,
2020) which are then enforced by CBFs. (Taylor et al., 2020a) used data to learn system dynamics
for CBFs. In a similar setting, (Lopez et al., 2020) used adaptive control approaches to estimate
the unknown system parameters in CBFs. In (Yaghoubi et al., 2020), neural network controllers are
trained using CBFs in the presence of disturbances. These prior works focus on learning safe sets
and dynamics, whereas we focus on the design of environment dependent and trainable CBFs.
Optimization-based safety frameworks. Recent advances in differentiable optimization methods
show promising directions for safety guaranteed neural network controllers (Lechner et al., 2020b;
Gruenbacher et al., 2020; Grunbacher et al., 2021; Gruenbacher et al., 2021; Massiani et al., 2021;
Lechner et al., 2021). In (Amos and Kolter, 2017), a differentiable quadratic program (QP) layer,
called OptNet, was introduced. The OptNet has been used in neural networks as a filter for safe
controls (Pereira et al., 2020), in which case the OptNet is not trainable, thus, could limit the sys-
tem’s learning performance. In contrast, we propose a trainable safety-guaranteed neural controller.
In (Deshmukh et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021), safety guaranteed neural network
controllers have been learned through verification-in-the-loop training. A safe neural network filter
has been proposed in (Ferlez et al., 2020) for a specific vehicle model using verification methods.
The verification approaches can not ensure coverage of the entire state space, they are offline and
are not adaptive to environment changes (such as varying size of the unsafe sets) (Li, 2021). In
comparison, BarrierNet is online, easily scalable, general to control problems and is adaptive to the
environment changes.

                                                   3
                                        X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




3. Backgrounds
In this section, we briefly introduce control barrier functions (CBF) and refer interested readers
to (Ames et al., 2017) for detailed formulations. Intuitively, CBF is a means to translate state
constraints to control constraints under affine dynamics. The controls that satisfy those constraints
can be efficiently solved for by formulating a quadratic program. We start with the definition of a
class K function.

Definition 1 (Class K function (Khalil, 2002)) A continuous function α : [0, a) → [0, ∞), a > 0 is
said to belong to class K if it is strictly increasing and α(0) = 0. A continuous function β : R → R
is said to belong to extended class K if it is strictly increasing and β(0) = 0.

Consider an affine control system of the form

                                         ẋ = f (x) + g(x)u                                        (1)

where x ∈ Rn , f : Rn → Rn and g : Rn → Rn×q are locally Lipschitz, and u ∈ U ⊂ Rq , where
U denotes a control constraint set.

Definition 2 A set C ⊂ Rn is forward invariant for system (1) if its solutions for some u ∈ U
starting at any x(0) ∈ C satisfy x(t) ∈ C, ∀t ≥ 0.

Definition 3 (Relative degree) The relative degree of a (sufficiently many times) differentiable func-
tion b : Rn → R with respect to system (1) is the number of times it needs to be differentiated along
its dynamics until the control u explicitly shows in the corresponding derivative.

Since function b is used to define a (safety) constraint b(x) ≥ 0, we will also refer to the relative
degree of b as the relative degree of the constraint. For a constraint b(x) ≥ 0 with relative degree m,
b : Rn → R, and ψ0 (x) := b(x), we define a sequence of functions ψi : Rn → R, i ∈ {1, . . . , m}:

                       ψi (x) := ψ̇i−1 (x) + αi (ψi−1 (x)),     i ∈ {1, . . . , m},                (2)

where αi (·), i ∈ {1, . . . , m} denotes a (m − i)th order differentiable class K function.
   We further define a sequence of sets Ci , i ∈ {1, . . . , m} associated with (2) in the form:

                        Ci := {x ∈ Rn : ψi−1 (x) ≥ 0},        i ∈ {1, . . . , m}.                  (3)

Definition 4 (High Order Control Barrier Function (HOCBF) (Xiao and Belta, 2021)) Let C1 , . . . , Cm
be defined by (3) and ψ1 (x), . . . , ψm (x) be defined by (2). A function b : Rn → R is a High Order
Control Barrier Function (HOCBF) of relative degree m for system (1) if there exist (m − i)th order
differentiable class K functions αi , i ∈ {1, . . . , m − 1} and a class K function αm such that
                                    m−1
                sup [Lm
                      f b(x) + [Lg Lf   b(x)]u+O(b(x)) + αm (ψm−1 (x))] ≥ 0,                       (4)
                u∈U

for all x ∈ C1 ∩, . . . , ∩Cm . In (4), Lm
                                         f (Lg ) denotes Lie derivatives along f (g) m (one) times, and
             Pm−1 i
O(b(x)) = i=1 Lf (αm−i ◦ ψm−i−1 )(x). Further, b(x) is such that Lg Lm−1          f   b(x) 6= 0 on the
boundary of the set C1 ∩, . . . , ∩Cm .

                                                   4
                                                BARRIER N ET




                                           Table 1: Notation
                               Symbol                          Definition
                                    t                              time
                                    θ                     BarrierNet parameters
                                x ∈ Rn                         vehicle state
                                 z ∈ Rd                    observation variable
                                 u ∈ Rq                           control
                     α : [0, a) → [0, ∞), a > 0              class K function
                              β:R→R                    extended class K function
                              b : Rn → R                     safety constraint
                             ψ : Rn → R                            CBF
                            p : Rd → R>0                     penalty function
                                C ⊂ Rn                            safe set
                          l : Rq × Rq → R                   similarity measure
                            f : Rn → Rn                affine dynamics drift term
                           g : Rn → Rn×q              affine dynamics control term


     The HOCBF is a general form of the relative degree one CBF (Ames et al., 2017) (setting m = 1
reduces the HOCBF to the common CBF form). Note that we can define αi (·), i ∈ {1, . . . , m} in
Def. 4 to be extended class K functions to ensure robustness of a HOCBF to perturbations (Ames
et al., 2017). However, the use of extended class K functions cannot ensure a constraint is eventually
satisfied if it is initially violated.
Theorem 5 ((Xiao and Belta, 2021)) Given a HOCBF b(x) from Def. 4 with the associated sets
C1 , . . . , Cm defined by (3), if x(0) ∈ C1 ∩, . . . , ∩Cm , then any Lipschitz continuous controller u(t)
that satisfies the constraint in (4), ∀t ≥ 0 renders C1 ∩, . . . , ∩Cm forward invariant for system (1).
We provide a summary of notations in Table 1.

4. Problem Formulation
Here, we formally define the learning problem for safety-critical control.
Problem 1 Given (i) a system with known affine dynamics in the form of 1, (ii) a nominal controller
f ? (x) = u? , (iii) a set of safety constraints bj (x) ≥ 0, j ∈ S (where bj is continuously differen-
tiable), (iv) control bounds umin ≤ u ≤ umax and (v) a neural network controller f (x|θ) = u
parameterized by θ, our goal is to find the optimal parameters

                                  θ? = arg minEx [l(f ? (x), f (x|θ))]                                 (5)
                                            θ
while guaranteeing the satisfaction of the safety constraints in (iii) and control bounds in (iv). E(·)
is the expectation and l(·, ·) denotes a similarity measure.
   Problem 1 defines a policy distillation problem with safety guarantees. The safety constraints
can be pre-defined by users or can be learned from data (Robey et al., 2020), (Srinivasan et al.,
2020).

                                                     5
                                        X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




5. BarrierNet
In this section, we propose BarrierNet - an CBF-based neural network controller with parameters
that are trainable via backpropagation. We define the safety guarantees of a neural network con-
troller as follows:
Definition 6 (Safety guarantees) A neural network controller has safety guarantees for system (1)
if its outputs (controls) drive system (1) such that bj (x(t)) ≥ 0, ∀t ≥ 0, ∀j ∈ S, for continuously
differentiable bj : Rn → R.
    We start with the motivations of a BarrierNet. The HOCBF method provides safety guarantees
for control systems with arbitrary relative degrees, but in a conservative way. In other words, the
satisfaction of the HOCBF constraint (4) is only a sufficient condition of the satisfaction of the
original safety constraint b(x) ≥ 0. This conservativeness of the HOCBF method will significantly
limit the system performance. For example, such conservativeness may drive the system much
further away from obstacles than necessary. Our first motivation is to address this conservativeness.
    More specifically, a HOCBF constraint is always a hard constraint in order to guarantee safety.
This may adversely affect the performance of the system. In order to address this, we soften a
HOCBF in a way without loosing the safety guarantees. In addition, we also incorporate HOCBF
in a differentiable optimization layer to allow tuning of its parameters from data.
    Given a safety requirement b(x) ≥ 0 with relative degree m for system (1), we change the
sequence of CBFs in (2) by:
                ψi (x, z) := ψ̇i−1 (x, z) + pi (z)αi (ψi−1 (x, z)),   i ∈ {1, . . . , m},          (6)
where ψ0 (x, z) = b(x) and z ∈ Rd are the input of the neural network (d ∈ N is the dimension
of the features), pi : Rd → R>0 , i ∈ {1, . . . , m} are the outputs of the previous layer, where R>0
denotes the set of positive scalars. The above formulation is similar to the Adaptive CBF (AdaCBF)
(Xiao et al., 2021b), but is trainable, and does not require us to design auxiliary dynamics for pi (an
AdaCBF does require), a non-trivial process of the existing AdaCBF method. In order to make sure
that the HOCBF method can be solved in a time-discretization way (Ames et al., 2017), we require
that each pi is Lipschitz continuous. Then, we have a similar HOCBF constraint as in Def. 4 in the
form:
                                m−1
              Lmf b(x) + [Lg Lf     b(x)]u+O(b(x), z) + pm (z)αm (ψm−1 (x, z)) ≥ 0,                 (7)
    Following the discretization solving method introduced in (Ames et al., 2017), if we wish to
minimize the control input effort (in the case where the reference control is 0), we can reformulate
our problem as the following sequence of QPs:
                                                    1
                                  u∗ (t) = arg min u(t)T Hu(t)                                     (8)
                                               u(t) 2

s.t.
                         m−1
        Lm
         f bj (x) + [Lg Lf   bj (x)]u+O(bj (x), z) + pm (z)αm (ψm−1 (x, z)) ≥ 0, j ∈ S
                                         umin ≤ u ≤ umax ,
                                            t = k∆t + t0 ,
where ∆t > 0 is the discretization time. Since the QPs in (8) is solved pointwise, the resulting
solutions would be sub-optimal. In order to address this problem and be able to track any nominal
controllers, we introduce BarrierNet.

                                                  6
                                             BARRIER N ET




Definition 7 (BarrierNet) A BarrierNet is composed by neurons in the form:

                                          1
                        u∗ (t) = arg min u(t)T H(z|θh )u(t) + F T (z|θf )u(t)                        (9)
                                     u(t) 2

s.t.
                        m−1
       Lm
        f bj (x) + [Lg Lf   bj (x)]u+O(bj (x), z|θp ) + pm (z|θpm )αm (ψm−1 (x, z|θp )) ≥ 0, j ∈ S
                                                                                                 (10)
                                        umin ≤ u ≤ umax ,

                                             t = k∆t + t0 ,
where F (z|θf ) ∈ Rq could be interpreted as a reference control (can be the output of previous
network layers) and θh , θf , θp = (θp1 , . . . , θpm ) are trainable parameters.

The inequality (10) in Definition 7 guarantees each safety constraint bj (x) ≥ 0, ∀j ∈ S through
the parameterized function pi , i ∈ {1, . . . , m}. Based on Def. 7, for instance, if we have 10 control
agents, we need 10 BarrierNet neurons presented by (9) to ensure the safety of each agent. This
implies that BarrierNets can be extended to multi-agent settings.
     In Def. 7, we make both H(z|θh ) and F (z|θf ) parameterized and dependent on the network
input z, but H and F can also be directly trainable parameters that do not depend on the previous
layer (i.e., we have H and F ). The same applies to pi , i ∈ {1, . . . , m}. The trainable parameters are
θ = {θh , θf , θp } (or θ = {H, F, pi , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , m}} if H, F and pi do not depend on the previous
layer). The solution u∗ is the output of the neuron. The BarrierNet is differentiable with respect to
its parameters (Amos and Kolter, 2017). We describe the forward and backward passes as follows.
     Forward pass: The forward step of a BarrierNet is to solve the QP in Definition 7. The inputs
of a BarrierNet include environmental features z (such as the location and speed of an obstacle) that
can be provided directly or from a tracking network if raw sensory inputs are used. BarrierNet also
takes as inputs the system states x as a feedback, as shown in Fig. 1. The outputs are the solutions
of the QP (the resultant controls).
     Backward pass: The main task of BarrierNet is to provide controls while always ensuring
safety. Suppose ` denotes some loss function (a similarity measure). Using the techniques intro-
duced in (Amos and Kolter, 2017), the relevant gradient with respect to all the BarrierNet parame-
ters can be given by (the gradient with respect to the parameters θh , θf , θp can be obtained using the
chain rule):
                                    1
                           5H ` = (du uT + udTu ),              5F ` = du ,
                                    2                                                                (11)
                           5G ` = D(λ∗ )(dλ uT + λdTu ), 5h ` = −D(λ∗ )dλ ,
where λ are the dual variables on the HOCBF constraints and D(·) creates diagonal matrix from a
vector. G, h are concatenated by Gj , hj , j ∈ S, where

                        Gj = −Lg Lm−1
                                  f   bj (x),
                                                                                                    (12)
                        hj = Lm
                              f bj (x)+O(bj (x), z) + pm (z)αm (ψm−1 (x, z)).

Since the control bounds in (9) are not trainable, they are not included in G, h.

                                                   7
                                        X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




    In (11), du and dλ are given by solving:
                                                       −1  ∂` T 
                                             GT D(λ∗ )
                               
                           du         H                     ( ∂u∗ )
                                 =                                  ,                               (13)
                            dλ        G D(Gu∗ − h)              0
    The above equation is obtained by taking the Lagrangian of QP followed by applying the
Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions. 5G ` is not applicable in a BarrierNet as it is determined by
the corresponding HOCBF. 5h ` is also not directly related to the input of a BarrierNet. Neverthe-
less, we have 5pi ` = 5hj ` 5pi hj , i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, j ∈ S ,where 5hj ` is given by 5h ` in (11)
and 5pi hj is given by taking the partial derivative of hj in (12).
    The Following theorem characterizes the safety guarantees of a BarrierNet:

Theorem 8 If pi (z), i ∈ {1, . . . , m} are Lipschitz continuous, then a BarrerNet composed by neu-
rons as in Def. 7 guarantees the safety of system (1).

proof: Since pi (z), i ∈ {1, . . . , m} are Lipschitz continuous, it follows from Thm. 5 that each
ψi (x, z) in (6) is a valid CBF. Starting from ψm (x, z) ≥ 0 (the non-Lie-derivative form of each
HOCBF constraint (7)), we can show that ψm−1 (x, z) ≥ 0 is guaranteed to be satisfied following
Thm. 5. Recursively, we can show that ψ0 (x, z) ≥ 0 is guaranteed to be satisfied. As b(x) =
ψ0 (x, z) following (6), we have that system (1) is safety guaranteed in a BarrierNet. 

Remark 9 (Adaptivity of the BarrierNet) The HOCBF constraints in a BarrierNet are softened
by the trainable penalty functions without loosing safety guarantees. The penalty functions are
environment dependent which features can be calculated from upstream networks. The adaptive
property of the HOCBFs provides the adaptivity of the BarrierNet. As a result, BarrierNet is able
to generate safe controls while avoid being overly conservative.

    In order to guarantee that pi (z), i ∈ {1, . . . , m} are Lipschitz continuous, we can choose activa-
tion functions of the previous layer as some continuously differentiable functions, such as sigmoid
functions. The process of constructing and training a BarrierNet includes: (a) construct a softened
HOCBF by (6) that enforces each of the safety requirement, (b) construct the parameterized Barri-
erNet by (9), (c) get the training data set using the nominal controller, and (d) train the BarrierNet
using error backpropogation. We summarize the algorithm for the BarrierNet in Alg. 1.
    Limitations: The proposed BarrierNet can theoretically guarantee system safety. However,
there are also some limitations:
    (i) The number of safety constraints in a BarrierNet should be defined in training. In some
scenarios, the number of safety constraints may be time-varying. Therefore, how to match multiple
safety constraints with the definition of a BarrierNet remains a challenge. It is possible that we may
define more than necessary constraints in a BarrierNet, and only enable those when required.
    (ii) The BarrierNet is solved in discrete time, as we can only feed discrete data into the neural
network. The inter-sampling effect (the system’s trajectory between time intervals) should also
be considered in order to achieve safety guarantees. The inter-sampling effect is sensitive at the
boundary of the safety set. Therefore, we need to avoid sampling training data at the safety set
boundary. However, due to the Lyapunov property of HOCBFs, the system will always stay close
to the safety set boundary if the safety constraint is violated due to the inter-sampling effect, or
some perturbations. A possible approach to address the inter-sampling effect is the data-driven
event-triggered framework (Xiao et al., 2021a).

                                                   8
                                            BARRIER N ET




Algorithm 1 Construction and training of the BarrierNet
Input: Dynamics (1), Safety requirements in Problem 1, a nominal controller
Output: A safety-guaranteed BarrierNet controller.
 (a) Construct softened HOCBFs by (6)
 (b) Construct the BarrierNet by (9)
 (c) Get the training data set using the nominal controller
 (d) Initialize the BarrierNet parameter θ, the Epochs, and the learning rate γ
 while e in Epochs do
      Forward: Solve (9) and get the loss `
     Backward: Get the loss gradient 5θ ` using (11)
     θ ← θ − γ 5θ `
end
return θ (optimal parameters in the BarrierNet)


6. Numerical Evaluations
In this section, we present three case studies (a traffic merging control problem and robot navigation
problems in 2D and 3D) to verify the effectiveness of our proposed BarrierNet.


6.1. Traffic Merging Control
Experiment setup. The traffic merging problem arises when traffic must be joined from two differ-
ent roads, usually associated with a main lane and a merging lane as shown in Fig.1. We consider
the case where all traffic consisting of controlled autonomous vehicles (CAVs) arrive randomly at
the origin (O and O0 ) and join at the Merging Point (MP) M where a lateral collision may occur.
The segment from the origin to the merging point M has length L for both lanes, and is called the
Control Zone (CZ). All CAVs do not overtake each other in the CZ as each road consists of a single
lane. A coordinator is associated with the MP whose function is to maintain a First-In-First-Out
(FIFO) queue of CAVs based on their arrival time at the CZ. The coordinator also enables real-time
communication among the CAVs that are in the CZ including the last one leaving the CZ. The FIFO
assumption, imposed so that CAVs cross the MP in their order of arrival, is made for simplicity and
often to ensure fairness.
Notation. xk , vk , uk denote the along-lane position, speed and acceleration (control) of CAV k, re-
spectively. t0k , tm
                   k denote the arrival time of CAV k at the origin and the merging point, respectively.
zk,kp denotes the along lane distance between CAV k and its preceding CAV kp , as shown in Fig. 2.

   Our goal is to jointly minimize all vehicles’ travel time and energy consumption in the control
zone. Written as an objective function, we have
                                                       Z tm
                                                              k   1 2
                                 min β(tm    0
                                        k − tk ) +                 u (t)dt,                        (14)
                                 uk (t)                 t0k       2 k

where uk is the vehicle’s control (acceleration), and β > 0 is a weight controlling the relative
magnitude of travel time and energy consumption. We assume double integrator dynamics for all
vehicles.

                                                   9
                                         X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




Figure 2: A traffic merging problem. A collision may happen at the merging point as well as every-
          where within the control zone.


     Each vehicle k should satisfy the following rear-end safety constraint if its preceding vehicle kp
is in the same lane:
                                zk,kp (t) ≥ φvk (t) + δ, ∀t ∈ [t0k , tm
                                                                      k ],                         (15)
where zk,kp = xkp − xk denotes the along-lane distance between k and kp , φ is the reaction time
(usually takes 1.8s) and δ ≥ 0.
    The traffic merging problem is to find an optimal control that minimizes (14), subject to (15). We
assume vehicle k has access to only the information of its immediate neighbors from the coordinator
(shown in Fig. 2), such as the preceding vehicle kp . This merging problem can be solved analytically
by optimal control methods (Xiao and Cassandras, 2021), but at the cost of extensive computation,
and the solution becomes complicated when one or more constraints become active in an optimal
trajectory, hence possibly prohibitive for real-time implementation.
    BarrierNet design. We enforce the safety constraint (15) by a CBF b(zk,kp , vk ) = zk,kp (t) −
φvk (t)−δ, and any control input uk should satisfy the CBF constraint (4) which in this case (choose
α1 as a linear function in Def. 4) is :

                      ϕuk (t) ≤ vk (t) − vkp (t) + p1 (z)(zk,kp (t) − φvk (t) − δ)                   (16)

where vk is the speed of vehicle k and z = (xkp , vkp , xk , vk ) is the input of the neural network model
(to be designed later). p1 (z) is called a penalty in the CBF that addresses the conservativeness of
the CBF method. The cost in the neuron of the BarrierNet is given by:

                                           min(uk − f1 (z))2                                         (17)
                                            uk

where f1 (z) is a reference to be trained (the output of the FC network). Then, we create a neural
network model whose structure is composed by a fully connected (FC) network (an input layer and
two hidden layers) followed by a BarrierNet. The input of the FC network is z, and its output is the
penalty p1 (z) and the reference f1 (z). While the input of the BarrierNet is the penalty p1 (z) and
the reference f1 (z), and its output is applied to control a vehicle k in the control zone.
    Results and discussion. To get the training data set, we solve an optimal or joint optimal control
and barrier function (OCBF) (Xiao et al., 2021c) controller offline. The solutions of an optimal or

                                                   10
                                                                                                                      BARRIER N ET




OCBF controller are taken as labels. The training results with the optimal controller and the OCBF
controller are shown in Figs. 3 - 5.



                                                                                    ground truth (optimal)




                                      Control uk /(m/s 2 )
                                                             0.3                    test
                                                                                    implementation
                                                             0.2
                                                             0.1
                                                             0.0
                                                                                0            2           4                  6                                8       10           12       14
                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                time/s




                                              Penalty function p1 (z)
                                                                        3
                                                                        2
                                                                        1
                                                                        0       0            2               4              6                                8       10           12       14
                                                                                                                                time/s


Figure 3: The control and penalty function p1 (z) from the BarrierNet when training with the opti-
          mal controller. The blues curves (labeled as implementation) are the vehicle control when
          we apply the BarrierNet to drive the vehicle dynamics to pass through the control zone.




                                                                                                                 FC
                          1.900                                                                                  BarrierNet                             1.900
                                                                                                                 φ = 1.8
                          1.875                                                                                                                         1.875




    Safety metric zk, kp /vk                                                                                                      Safety metric zk, kp /vk
                          1.850                                                                                                                         1.850
                          1.825                                                                                                                         1.825
                          1.800                                                                                                                         1.800
                          1.775                                                                                                                         1.775
                                                                                                                                                                     FC
                          1.750                                                                                                                         1.750        BarrierNet
                                                                                                                                                                     φ = 1.8
                          1.725                                                                                                                         1.725
                                  0           2                             4        6       8      10           12        14                                    0        2    4       6    8   10   12   14
                                                                                     time/s                                                                                            time/s

                     (a) Training using the optimal controller.                                                                                              (b) Training using the OCBF controller

Figure 4: The safety comparison (under 10 trained models) between the BarrierNet and a FC net-
          work when training using the optimal/OCBF controller (δ = 0). If zk,kp /vk is above
          the line φ = 1.8, then safety is guaranteed. We observe that only neural network agents
          equipped with BarrierNet satisfy this condition.




                                                                                                                                 11
                                                        X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




                                          1.0                                         ground truth




              Control uk /(m/s 2 )
                                                                                      test
                                          0.5                                         implementation

                                          0.0
                                          0.5
                                          1.0   0   2   4      6            8   10   12        14
                                                                   time/s
                                         1.50




               Penalty function p1 (z)
                                         1.25
                                         1.00
                                         0.75
                                         0.50
                                         0.25
                                         0.00   0   2   4      6            8   10   12         14
                                                                   time/s


Figure 5: The control and penalty function p1 (z) from the BarrierNet when training with the OCBF
          controller. The blues curves (labeled as implementation) are the vehicle control when we
          apply the BarrierNet to drive the vehicle dynamics to pass through the control zone.




    In an optimal controller, the original safety constraint is active after around 6s, as shown in Fig.
3. Therefore, the sampling trajectory is on the safety boundary, and inter-sampling effect becomes
important in this case. Since we do not consider the inter-sampling effect in this paper, the safety
metric of the BarrierNet might go below the lower bound φ = 1.8, as the red curves shown in Fig.
4a. However, due to the Lyapunov property of the CBF, the safety metric will always stay close to
the lower bound φ = 1.8. The solutions for 10 trained models are also consistent. In a FC network,
the safety metrics vary under different trained models, and the safety constraint might be violated,
as the blue curves shown in Fig. 4a.

    In an OCBF controller, the original safety constraint is not active, and thus, the inter-sampling
effect is not sensitive. As shown in Figs. 4b, safety is always guaranteed in a BarrierNet under
10 trained models. While in a FC network, the safety constraint may be violated as there are no
guarantees.

     We present the penalty functions when training with the optimal controller and the OCBF con-
troller in Figs. 3 and 5, respectively. The penalty function p1 (z) decreases when the CBF con-
straint becomes active. This shows the adaptivity of the BarrierNet. This behavior is similar to
the AdaCBF, but in the BarrierNet, we do not need to design auxiliary dynamics for the penalty
functions. Therefore, the BarrierNet is simpler than the AdaCBF. Finally, we present a compre-
hensive comparison between the BarrierNet, the FC network, the optimal controller and the OCBF
controller in Table 2.

                                                                    12
                                                                BARRIER N ET




Table 2: Comparisons between the BarrierNet, the FC network, the optimal controller and the
         OCBF controller

             item         R.T. compute                            safety                      Optimality          Adaptive
                              time                               guarantee
          BarrierNet         < 0.01s                                Yes                      close-optimal          Yes
             FC              < 0.01s                                No                       close-optimal          No
           Optimal            30s                                   Yes                         optimal             Yes
           OCBF              < 0.01s                                Yes                       sub-optimal           Yes


6.2. 2D Robot Navigation
Experiment setup. We consider a robot navigation problem with obstacle avoidance. In this case,
we consider nonlinear dynamics with two control inputs and nonlinear safety constraints. The robot
navigates according to the following unicycle model for a wheeled mobile robot:
                                                                                          
                              ẋ     v cos(θ)     0                                          0     
                             ẏ   v sin(θ)   0
                             =             +                                               u1
                                                                                             0 
                                                                                                                             (18)
                             θ̇       0      1                                          0  u2
                              v̇         0        0                                          1

where x := (x, y, θ, v), u = (u1 , u2 ), x, y denote the robot’s 2D coordinates, θ denotes the heading
angle of the robot, v denotes the linear speed, and u1 , u2 denote the two control inputs for turning
and acceleration.
BarrierNet design. The robot is required to avoid a circular obstacle in its path, i.e, the state of the
robot should satisfy:
                                    (x − xo )2 + (y − yo )2 ≥ R2 ,                                 (19)
where (xo , yo ) ∈ R2 denotes the location of the obstacle, and R > 0 is the radius of the obstacle.
   The goal is to minimize the control input effort, while subject to the safety constraint (19) as the
robot approaches its destination, as shown in Fig. 6.

                                   25


                                   20


                             y/m   15
                                            Initial
                                   10
                                                                                               Destination
                                                                             Obstacle
                                    5
                                        0             10   20      30          40       50      60           70
                                                                        x/m



Figure 6: A 2D robot navigation problem. The robot is required to avoid the obstacle in its path.
          The trajectories (the red and green ones) vary under different definitions of HOCBFs that
          enforce the safety cosntraint (19).


    The relative degree of the safety constraint (19) is 2 with respect to the dynamics (18), thus, we
use a HOCBF b(x) = (x − xo )2 + (y − yo )2 − R2 to enforce it. Any control input u should satisfy

                                                                        13
                                        X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




the HOCBF constraint (4) which in this case (choose α1 , α2 in Def. 4 as linear functions) is:

        −Lg Lf b(x)u ≤ L2f b(x) + (p1 (z) + p2 (z))Lf b(x) + (ṗ1 (z) + p1 (z)p2 (z))b(x)           (20)

where


  Lg Lf b(x) = [−2(x − xo )v sin θ + 2(y − yo )v cos θ,      2(x − xo ) cos θ + 2(y − yo ) sin θ]
  L2f b(x) = 2v 2                                                                                   (21)
  Lf b(x) = 2(x − xo )v cos θ + 2(y − yo )v sin θ

In the above equations, z = (x, xd ) is the input to the model, where xd ∈ R2 is the location of the
destination, and p1 (z), p2 (z) are the trainable penalty functions. ṗ1 (x) could be set as 0 due to the
discretization solving method of the QP (Ames et al., 2017).
    The cost in the neuron of the BarrierNet is given by:

                                 min(u1 − f1 (z))2 + (u2 − f2 (z))2                                 (22)
                                   u

where f1 (z), f2 (z) are references controls provided by the upstream network (the outputs of the FC
network).
    Results and dicussion. The training data is obtained by solving the CBF controller introduced
in (Xiao and Belta, 2021), and we generate 100 trajectories of different destinations as the training
data set. We compare the FC model, the deep foward-backward model (referred as DFB) (Pereira
et al., 2020) that is equivalent to take the CBF-based QP as a safety filter, and our proposed Bar-
rierNet. The training and testing results are shown in Figs. 7a-d. All the models are trained for
obstacle size R = 6m. The controls from the BarrierNet can stay very close to the ground truth,
while there are jumps for controls from the DFB when the robot gets close to the obstacle, which
shows the conservativeness of the DFB, as shown by the blue solid (BarrierNet) and blue dashed
(DFB) curves in Figs. 7a and 7b. The robot trajectory (dashed blue) from the DFB stays far away
from ground truth in Fig. 7d, and this again shows its conservativeness. The robot from the FC will
collide with the obstacle as there is no safety guarantee, as the dotted-blue line shown in Fig. 7d.
    When we increase the obstacle size during implementation (i.e., the trained BarrierNet/DFB/FC
controller is used to drive a robot to its destination), the controls u1 , u2 from the BarrierNet and
DFB deviate from the ground true, as shown in Figs. 8a and 8b. This is due to the fact that the
BarrierNet and DFB will always ensure safety first. Therefore, safety is always guaranteed in the
BarrierNet and DFB, as the solid and dashed curves shown in Fig. 9a. Both the BarrierNet and DFB
show some adaptivity to the size change of the obstacle. While the FC controller cannot be adaptive
to the size change of the obstacle. Thus, the safety constraint (19) will be violated, as shown by the
dotted curves in Fig. 9a.
    The difference between the DFB and the proposed BarrierNet is in the performance. In Fig. 9b,
we show all the trajectories from the BarrierNet, DFB and FC controllers under different obstacle
sizes. Collisions are avoided under the BarrierNet and DFB controllers, as shown by all the solid
and dashed trajectories and the corresponding obstacle boundaries in Fig. 9b. However, as shown
in Fig. 9b, the trajectories from the BarrierNet (solid) can stay closer to the ground true (red-solid)
than the ones from the DFB (dashed) when R = 6m (and other R values). This is due to the fact
that the CBFs in the DFB may not be properly defined such that the CBF constraint is active too

                                                   14
                                           BARRIER N ET




         (a) Control u1 .                 (b) Control u2 .              (c) Penalty functions.




                                      (d) Robot trajectories.

Figure 7: The controls and trajectories from the FC, DFB and BarrierNet under the training ob-
          stacle size R = 6m. The results refer to the case that the trained FC/DFB/BarrierNet
          controller is used to drive a robot to its destination. Safety is guaranteed in both DFB
          and BarrierNet models, but not in the FC model. The DFB tends to be more conservative
          such that the trajectories/controls stay away from the ground true as its CBF parameters
          are not adaptive. The varying penalty functions allow the generation of desired control
          signals and trajectories (given by training labels), and demonstrate the adaptivity of the
          BarrierNet with safety guarantees.




                                                15
                                                              X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




                                (a) Control u1 .                                      (b) Control u2 .

Figure 8: The controls from the BarrierNet and DFB under different obstacle sizes. The BarrierNet
          and DFB are trained under the obstacle size R = 6m. The results refer to the case that
          the trained BarrierNet/DFB controller is used to drive a robot to its destination. When we
          increase the obstacle size during implementation, the outputs (controls of the robot) of
          the BarrierNet and the DFB will adjust accordingly in order to guarantee safety, as shown
          by the blue and cyan curves. However, the BarrierNet tends to be less conservative for
          unseen situations.



                 200

                 150

                 100

                 50


    HOCBF b(x)
                           obstacle boundary
                  0        BarrierNet, R = 6m
                           BarrierNet, R = 9m
                  50       BarrierNet, R = 12m
                           DFB, R = 6m
                 100       DFB, R = 9m
                           DFB, R = 12m
                           FC, R = 6m
                 150       FC, R = 9m
                           FC, R = 12m
                 200   0        2        4       6        8    10   12        14
                                                 time/s

    (a) The HOCBF b(x) profiles under different (b) The robot trajectories under different ob-
        obstacle sizes.                             stacle sizes.
Figure 9: Safety metrics for the BarrierNet, the DFB and the FC network. The BarrierNet, the DFB
          and the FC network are trained under the obstacle size R = 6m. b(x) ≥ 0 implies safety
          guarantee. The trajectories under the FC controller coincide as the FC cannot adapt to the
          size change of the obstacle.



                                                                         16
                                             BARRIER N ET




early when the robot gets close to the obstacle. It is important to note that the robot does not have
to stay close to the obstacle boundary under the BarrierNet controller, and this totally depends on
the ground truth. The definitions of CBFs in the proposed BarrierNet depend on the environment
(network input), and thus, they are adaptive, and are without conservativeness.
    The profiles of the penalty functions p1 (z), p2 (z) in the BarrierNet are shown in Fig. 7c. The
values of the penalty functions vary when the robot approaches the obstacle and gets to its des-
tination, and it shows the adaptivity of the BarrierNet in the sense that with the varying penalty
functions, a BarrierNet can produce desired control signals given by labels (ground truth). This is
due to the fact the varying penalty functions soften the HOCBF constraint without loosing safety
guarantees.

6.3. 3D Robot Navigation
Experiment setup. We consider a robot navigation problem with obstacle avoidance in 3D space. In
this case, we consider complicated superquadratic safety constraints. The robot navigates according
to the double integrator dynamics. The state of the robot is x = (px , vx , py , vy , pz , vz ) ∈ R6 , in
which the components denote the position and speed along x, y, z axes, respectively. The three
control inputs u1 , u2 , u3 are the acceleration along x, y, z axes, respectively.
BarrierNet design. The robot is required to avoid a superquadratic obstacle in its path, i.e, the state
of the robot should satisfy:

                            (px − xo )4 + (py − yo )4 + (pz − zo )4 ≥ R4 ,                          (23)

where (xo , yo , zo ) ∈ R3 denotes the location of the obstacle, and R > 0 is the half-length of the
superquadratic obstacle.
   The goal is to minimize the control input effort, while subject to the safety constraint (23) as the
robot approaches its destination, as shown in Fig. 10.


                                                                       Destination




                           Origin




Figure 10: A 3D robot navigation problem. The robot is required to avoid the obstacle in its path.

    The relative degree of the safety constraint (23) is 2 with respect to the dynamics, thus, we use a
HOCBF b(x) = (px − xo )4 + (py − yo )4 + (pz − zo )4 − R4 to enforce it. Any control input u should
satisfy the HOCBF constraint (4) which in this case (choose α1 , α2 in Def. 4 as linear functions) is:

        −Lg Lf b(x)u ≤ L2f b(x) + (p1 (z) + p2 (z))Lf b(x) + (ṗ1 (z) + p1 (z)p2 (z))b(x)           (24)

                                                   17
                                          X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




where


                  Lg Lf b(x) = [4(px − xo )3 ,       4(py − yo )3 ,   4(pz − zo )3 ]
                  L2f b(x) = 12(px − xo )2 vx2 + 12(py − yo )2 vy2 + 12(pz − xo )2 vz2                (25)
                  Lf b(x) = 4(px − xo )3 vx + 4(py − yo )3 vy + 4(pz − zo )3 vz

In the above equations, z = x is the input to the model, p1 (z), p2 (z) are the trainable penalty
functions. ṗ1 (x) is also set as 0 as in the 2D navigation case.
    The cost in the neuron of the BarrierNet is given by:

                           min(u1 − f1 (z))2 + (u2 − f2 (z))2 + (u3 − f3 (z))2                        (26)
                            u

where f1 (z), f2 (z), f3 (z) are references controls provided by the upstream network (the outputs of
the FC network).
    Results and dicussion. The training data is obtained by solving the CBF controller introduced
in (Xiao and Belta, 2021). We compare the FC model with our proposed BarrierNet. The training
and testing results are shown in Figs. 11 and 12. The controls from the BarrierNet have some
errors with repsect to the ground truth, and this is due to the complicated safety constraint (23).
We can improve the tracking accuracy with deeper BarrierNet models (not the focus of this paper).
Nevertheless, the implementation trajectory under the BarrierNet controller is close to the ground
truth, as shown in Fig.12b.
    The robot is guaranteed to be collision-free from the obstacle under the BarrierNet controller,
as the solid-blue line shown in Fig.12b. While the robot from the FC may collide with the obstacle
as there is no safety guarantee, as the dotted-blue line shown in Fig. Fig.12b. The barrier function
in Fig.12a also demonstrates the safety guarantees of the BarrierNet, but not in the FC model. The
profiles of the penalty functions p1 (z), p2 (z) in the BarrierNet are shown in Fig. 11d. The values of
the penalty function variations demonstrate the adaptivity of the BarrierNet in the sense that with the
varying penalty functions, a BarrierNet can produce desired control signals given by labels (ground
truth).




        (a) Control u1 .          (b) Control u2 .         (c) Control u3 .      (d) Penalty functions.

Figure 11: The controls and penalty functions from the and BarrierNet. The results refer to the
           case that the trained BarrierNet controller is used to drive a robot to its destination. The
           varying penalty functions allow the generation of desired control signals and trajectories
           (given by training labels), and demonstrate the adaptivity of the BarrierNet with safety
           guarantees.




                                                     18
                                                            BARRIER N ET




                         obstacle boundary
                         BarrierNet
             25000       FC

             20000



HOCBF b(x)
             15000

             10000

             5000

                0
                     0       5        10     15       20   25   30
                                             time/s
                     (a) The HOCBF b(x) profiles.                          (b) The robot trajectories.

Figure 12: The HOCBFs and trajectories from the FC and BarrierNet. The results refer to the case
           that the trained FC/BarrierNet controller is used to drive a robot to its destination. Safety
           is guaranteed in the BarrierNet model, but not in the FC model.



7. Conclusion

    In this work, we proposed BarrierNet - a differentiable HOCBF layer that is trainable and guar-
antees safety with respect to the user defined safe sets. BarrierNet can be integrated with any
upstream neural network controller to provide a safety layer. In our experiments, we show that the
proposed BarrierNet can guarantee safety while addressing the conservativeness that control barrier
functions induce. A potential future avenue of research emerging from this work will be to simul-
taneously learn the system dynamics and unsafe sets with BarrierNets. This can be enabled using
the expressive class of continuous-time neural network models (Chen et al., 2018; Lechner et al.,
2020a; Hasani et al., 2021b; Vorbach et al., 2021).



Acknowledgments

    This research was sponsored by the United States Air Force Research Laboratory and the United
States Air Force Artificial Intelligence Accelerator and was accomplished under Cooperative Agree-
ment Number FA8750-19-2-1000. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of the United States Air Force or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is autho-
rized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright
notation herein. This work was further supported by The Boeing Company, and the Office of Naval
Research (ONR) Grant N00014-18-1-2830. We are grateful to the members of the Capgemini re-
search team for discussing the importance of safety and stability of machine learning.

                                                                 19
                                       X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




References
Aaron D Ames, Jessy W Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic
  programs with application to adaptive cruise control. In 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and
  Control, pages 6271–6278. IEEE, 2014.

Aaron D Ames, Xiangru Xu, Jessy W Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based
  quadratic programs for safety critical systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 62(8):
  3861–3876, 2017.

B. Amos and J. Z. Kolter. Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70, pages 136–
  145, 2017.

Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary dif-
  ferential equations. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pages 6572–6583, 2018.

Jason Choi, Fernando Castañeda, Claire J Tomlin, and Koushil Sreenath. Reinforcement learning
  for safety-critical control under model uncertainty, using control lyapunov functions and control
  barrier functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2020.

Noel Csomay-Shanklin, Ryan K Cosner, Min Dai, Andrew J Taylor, and Aaron D Ames. Episodic
  learning for safe bipedal locomotion with control barrier functions and projection-to-state safety.
  In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pages 1041–1053. PMLR, 2021.

J. V. Deshmukh, J. P. Kapinski, T. Yamaguchi, and D. Prokhorov. Learning deep neural network
   controllers for dynamical systems with safety guarantees: Invited paper. In 2019 IEEE/ACM
   International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), pages 1–7, 2019.

J. Ferlez, M. Elnaggar, Y. Shoukry, and C. Fleming. Shieldnn: A provably safe nn filter for unsafe
   nn controllers. preprint arXiv:2006.09564, 2020.

Sophie Gruenbacher, Jacek Cyranka, Mathias Lechner, Md Ariful Islam, Scott A Smolka, and Radu
  Grosu. Lagrangian reachtubes: The next generation. In 2020 59th IEEE Conference on Decision
  and Control (CDC), pages 1556–1563. IEEE, 2020.

Sophie Gruenbacher, Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Daniela Rus, Thomas A Henzinger, Scott
  Smolka, and Radu Grosu. Gotube: Scalable stochastic verification of continuous-depth models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08467, 2021.

Sophie Grunbacher, Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Jacek Cyranka, Scott A Smolka, and Radu
  Grosu. On the verification of neural odes with stochastic guarantees. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 11525–11535, 2021.

Thomas Gurriet, Andrew Singletary, Jacob Reher, Laurent Ciarletta, Eric Feron, and Aaron Ames.
  Towards a framework for realizable safety critical control through active set invariance. In 2018
  ACM/IEEE 9th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), pages 98–106.
  IEEE, 2018.

                                                 20
                                           BARRIER N ET




Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Lucas Liebenwein, Max Tschaikowski,
  Gerald Teschl, and Daniela Rus. Closed-form continuous-depth models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.13898, 2021a.

Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Liquid time-
  constant networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pages 7657–7666, 2021b.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
  770–778, 2016.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

W. Jin, Z. Wang, Z. Yang, and S. Mou. Neural certificates for safe control policies. preprint
  arXiv:2006.08465, 2020.

H. K. Khalil. Nonlinear Systems. Prentice Hall, third edition, 2002.

Mathias Lechner and Ramin Hasani. Learning long-term dependencies in irregularly-sampled time
 series. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04418, 2020.

Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Thomas A Henzinger, Daniela Rus, and Radu
 Grosu. Neural circuit policies enabling auditable autonomy. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(10):
 642–652, 2020a.

Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Gershgorin loss stabilizes the
 recurrent neural network compartment of an end-to-end robot learning scheme. In 2020 IEEE
 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 5446–5452. IEEE, 2020b.

Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Radu Grosu, Daniela Rus, and Thomas A. Henzinger. Adversarial
 training is not ready for robot learning. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
 Automation (ICRA), pages 4140–4147, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9561036.

Zhichao Li. Comparison between safety methods control barrier function vs. reachability analysis.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13176, 2021.

B. T. Lopez, J. J. E. Slotine, and J. P. How. Robust adaptive control barrier functions: An adaptive
  and data-driven approach to safety. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 5(3):1031–1036, 2020.

Pierre-François Massiani, Steve Heim, and Sebastian Trimpe. On exploration requirements for
  learning safety constraints. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pages 905–916. PMLR, 2021.

Quan Nguyen and Koushil Sreenath. Exponential control barrier functions for enforcing high
  relative-degree safety-critical constraints. In 2016 American Control Conference (ACC), pages
  322–328. IEEE, 2016.

M. A. Pereira, Z. Wang, I. Exarchos, and E. A. Theodorou. Safe optimal control using stochastic
 barrier functions and deep forward-backward sdes. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.

                                                21
                                     X IAO H ASANI L I RUS




A. Robey, H. Hu, L. Lindemann, H. Zhang, D. V. Dimarogonas, S. Tu, and N. Matni. Learning
  control barrier functions from expert demonstrations. In 2020 59th IEEE Conference on Decision
  and Control (CDC), pages 3717–3724, 2020.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
M. Srinivasan, A. Dabholkar, S. Coogan, and P. A. Vela. Synthesis of control barrier functions
 using a supervised machine learning approach. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
 Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 7139–7145, 2020.
Andrew Taylor, Andrew Singletary, Yisong Yue, and Aaron Ames. Learning for safety-critical
  control with control barrier functions. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pages 708–717.
  PMLR, 2020a.
Andrew J Taylor and Aaron D Ames. Adaptive safety with control barrier functions. In 2020
  American Control Conference (ACC), pages 1399–1405. IEEE, 2020.
Andrew J Taylor, Andrew Singletary, Yisong Yue, and Aaron D Ames. A control barrier perspective
  on episodic learning via projection-to-state safety. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 5(3):1019–
  1024, 2020b.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017.
Charles Vorbach, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Mathias Lechner, and Daniela Rus. Causal
  navigation by continuous-time neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08314, 2021.
Li Wang, Evangelos A Theodorou, and Magnus Egerstedt. Safe learning of quadrotor dynamics
  using barrier certificates. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pages 2460–2465. IEEE, 2018.
W. Xiao and C. Belta. High order control barrier functions. In IEEE Transactions on Automatic
  Control, doi:10.1109/TAC.2021.3105491, 2021.
W. Xiao and C. G. Cassandras. Decentralized optimal merging control for connected and automated
  vehicles with safety constraint guarantees. Automatica, 123:109333, 2021.
W. Xiao, C. Belta, and C. G. Cassandras. Event-triggered safety-critical control for systems with
  unknown dynamics. In Proc. of 60th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2021a.
W. Xiao, C. Belta, and C. G. Cassandras. Adaptive control barrier functions. In IEEE Transactions
  on Automatic Control, DOI: 10.1109/TAC.2021.3074895, 2021b.
W. Xiao, C. G. Cassandras, and C. Belta. Bridging the gap between optimal trajectory planning
  and safety-critical control with applications to autonomous vehicles. Automatica, 129:109592,
  2021c.
Xiangru Xu, Paulo Tabuada, Jessy W Grizzle, and Aaron D Ames. Robustness of control barrier
  functions for safety critical control. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(27):54–61, 2015.

                                               22
                                          BARRIER N ET




S. Yaghoubi, G. Fainekos, and S. Sankaranarayanan. Training neural network controllers using
   control barrier functions in the presence of disturbances. In IEEE 23rd International Conference
   on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pages 1–6, 2020.

G. Yang, C. Belta, and R. Tron. Self-triggered control for safety critical systems using control
  barrier functions. In Proc. of the American Control Conference, pages 4454–4459, 2019.

H. Zhao, X. Zeng, T. Chen, and J. Woodcock. Learning safe neural network controllers with barrier
  certificates. Form Asp Comp, 33:437–455, 2021.




                                                23
